Hi, I'm Ben Bodner
from the Display
and Color Technologies
team at Apple.
In this video, I'll explain
the capabilities, use cases,
and APIs of the new
Reference Mode on iPad Pro.
To help you understand
Reference Mode,
I should first describe
what a reference display is.
Many displays intentionally
manipulate the color, contrast,
and sharpness of images.
For example,
TVs usually have different modes
that each target some unique
aesthetic appearance,
and mobile devices often adapt
to ambient lighting.
While these sorts of features
may be desirable
in most situations,
they can be problematic
for content creators
who usually want to know
exactly how their display
is rendering images.
For that reason,
reference displays render color
precisely to the specifications
for a media format.
That means if you have
different reference displays,
they will all render
the same content consistently.
This consistency gives
content creators the ability
to use multiple displays with
the confidence that their work
will look the same
on all of them,
assuming they are viewed in the
appropriate lighting environment
for their media format.
Now that we have
an understanding
of reference displays,
let's get into the details
of Reference Mode on iPad.
First, I'll explain when
and how to use Reference Mode.
Next, I'll cover the specific
capabilities of Reference Mode
including which
media formats are supported.
And last,
I'll give a rundown of the APIs
associated with Reference Mode.
So, when is it appropriate
to use Reference Mode
and how do we enable it?
Reference Mode enables
or enhances a variety
of content creation workflows.
It adds support
for color-critical tasks
that require
a reference display,
which historically have not
been possible on mobile devices.
This includes color grading,
along with review and approval
of graded content.
It also brings color accuracy
to mobile video editing
and compositing apps,
improving the experience
for users
who typically would not have
access to a reference display.
Finally, Reference Mode
supports both Metal
and AVFoundation-based
color rendering,
so apps serving these workflows
can use either of them.
Reference Mode is similar
to the reference display presets
already available
on some macOS systems
but with
an important difference.
On macOS, multiple
preset modes are available
that each deliver
reference color rendering
for different formats.
On iPad, Reference Mode
is just one setting
that is either turned on or off.
That means you can get
reference color rendering
for multiple formats without
the need to change settings.
This mode can only be accessed
through the iPad settings
by a user and cannot be
programmatically enabled
or disabled by an app.
Reference Mode is supported
on the 12.9-inch
fifth-generation iPad Pro.
It can be used with an iPad
as a standalone device,
but it also brings new
capability to Sidecar,
a feature that allows
an iPad to be used
as a secondary monitor
for a macOS device.
Previously,
Sidecar did not support EDR.
But now, if Reference Mode
is enabled on an iPad
used as a Sidecar display,
it will support EDR in addition
to enabling reference color
rendering for supported formats.
This new functionality also
requires an Apple silicon Mac
with macOS Ventura
to be used as the host
for the Sidecar display.
Enabling Reference Mode
manipulates several other items
in the Settings menu.
To achieve consistent
color rendering,
the brightness slider is locked
and dynamic display features
are turned off.
This includes disabling
and locking True Tone
and Night Shift, along with
the Auto-Brightness feature.
Now that I've explained
when and how
to enable Reference Mode,
let's take a closer look
at what it means to run
the reference color,
along with the specific
capabilities of Reference Mode.
Like the macOS presets
I mentioned earlier,
Reference Mode uses
color management
to support several different
media formats.
This ensures that color
is rendered accurately
based on the specification
for each format.
Of course, to determine
how colors should be rendered,
media needs to be tagged
to indicate which format it is.
For reference color
management to be valid,
the display should
only be viewed
in the reference
environment
specified by
the format standard.
The video format supported
by Reference Mode
require a dim environment,
while graphics should be viewed
in a bright indoor environment.
So what sort of color management
does Reference Mode use?
All formats of color
managed to a similar spec.
This includes a D65 white point
and a peak luminance
of 100 nits for SDR media
or 1000 nits for HDR media.
For HDR formats, tone-mapping
is disabled so the display
will precisely track
the format's transfer function.
And colors
will be displayed correctly
as long as they don't exceed
1000 nits
and are within
the P3 color gamut,
which is the iPad's
native gamut.
Colors that are out of gamut
or brighter than 1000 nits
will be clipped
with no tone-mapping.
The result of that clipping
may vary based on the format.
Speaking of formats,
here's a list of the ones
supported by Reference Mode,
along with the corresponding
macOS reference display
preset for each.
On iPad, Reference Mode
will determine
the appropriate color management
based on color tagging,
so there's no need
to switch between presets.
One example of tagging are
the ITU H.273 code points
included in this table,
which you may know as
NCLC color tags from QuickTime.
But there are other forms of
tagging that can also be used.
If your app uses a format that
isn't on this list, don't worry.
Reference Mode still color
manages unsupported formats;
they'll just be rendered
in a similar way
to the default display mode.
You may notice that
some of these rows
include multiple formats.
That's because the formats
listed in the same row should
result in the same rendering
on a reference display.
For example, HDR10
and BT.2100 PQ both use
the BT 2020 color primaries,
the PQ transfer function,
and the BT 2020 YCC matrix
as described by the code points
9-16-9.
But HDR10 also includes
HDR metadata
that can be used
to inform tone-mapping.
In the iPad's
default display mode,
this could result in different
renditions of the same content
depending on the format.
But since Reference Mode
does not tone-map,
any HDR metadata is ignored
and both formats
are rendered identically.
Generally speaking, reference
displays are calibrated
with an optical measurement
device to ensure color accuracy.
Like macOS presets,
Reference Mode
includes a fine-tuned
calibration feature
that allows the white point
chromaticity and luminance
to be calibrated
at a single point.
This color adjustment
is intended to account
for display aging
and differences between
measurement devices
so that your iPad's white point
and peak luminance
will match other displays
that have been calibrated
with the same device.
That wraps up the specifics
of Reference Mode's capabilities
in color rendering.
Next, let's discuss
the UIScreen APIs
associated with Reference Mode.
But before doing so, I should
quickly recap what EDR is.
EDR stands
for extended dynamic range
and is Apple's HDR technology.
It includes both
rendering technologies
and pixel representations.
EDR pixels can represent
both SDR and HDR content.
An important component
of EDR is headroom,
which is the HDR
peak luminance
divided by the SDR
peak luminance.
In Reference Mode,
HDR peak is always 1000 nits
and SDR peak is always 100 nits,
meaning EDR headroom
is always 10 times.
EDR ensures that SDR pixels,
which are represented
with values from zero to one,
are always rendered.
Any values between one
and the EDR headroom
will be properly rendered
without tone-mapping,
while values that are brighter
than EDR headroom
will be clipped.
However, there may be cases
where you decide
that the headroom is not high
enough to justify rendering
your content as EDR and instead
want to implement an SDR path.
There may also be times when
you prefer to make use
of the available EDR headroom by
applying your own tone-mapping.
In either case, UIScreen
has new query properties
and notifications you can use
to make rendering decisions
in your app.
More specifically,
you can use UIScreen to register
for notifications about changes
in Reference Mode status
and then query for changes
in that status.
You can also use UIScreen
to query the device's current
and potential EDR
headroom properties.
I'll talk more about
that a bit later.
For changes in display mode
status, register for the
UIScreen.referenceDisplayMode
StatusDidChangeNotification.
For query purposes,
you can use this notification
to get the new status and the
new potential EDR headroom,
both of which may inform
rendering decisions in your app.
For example,
you might want your app
to apply its own tone-mapping
based on the EDR headroom
when Reference Mode is disabled
and not apply any tone-mapping
if Reference Mode is enabled.
Once you receive a notification
for a change
in display mode status,
you can use the reference
display mode status property
of UIScreen to get
the current status.
This will be one of four
enumerated types.
If StatusEnabled is returned,
then Reference Mode is enabled
and is rendering as expected.
If StatusLimited is returned,
then Reference Mode is enabled
but temporarily can't render
a reference response
due to EDR headroom being
limited to less than 10 times.
If this status occurs,
a UI notification
will also inform your users
that the reference
rendering is compromised.
If StatusNotEnabled
is returned,
then Reference Mode
is supported on this device,
but it hasn't been
enabled by the user.
And lastly, if
StatusNotSupported is returned,
then Reference Mode is
not supported on this device.
Next, let's take a look
at some Swift code to see
how you can take advantage
of UIScreen notifications.
Here, we'll start by getting
a default notification object
from the NotificationCenter.
Then, we'll add
a notification observer
to your default
notification object.
In this example, the
screenChangedEvent selector
determines the message that the
receiver sends to the observer
to alert the observer that
the notification is posted.
The name of the notification
to register
for delivery to the observer is
UIScreen.referenceDisplayMode
StatusDidChangeNotification.
Now whenever
the status changes,
the function screenChangedEvent
will be called.
In this example implementation
of screenChangedEvent,
we'll first get a UIScreen
from the window scene.
Then, we can get the new
referenceDisplayModeStatus
property from the UIScreen.
You can also get the new
potential EDR headroom value
and use it in your application's
rendering paths.
That covers Reference Mode
status-change notifications,
so let's move on to talking
about EDR headroom.
Earlier, I mentioned
two types of EDR headroom:
current and potential.
These properties are relevant
to any developer
working with EDR and are not
specific to Reference Mode.
Potential headroom returns
the maximum possible headroom
of your display.
For example, you may decide
to use an SDR rendering path
in your app if potential
headroom doesn't exceed 1.0
or some other threshold.
The current headroom is dynamic
and may be less
than the potential headroom
for a variety of reasons.
You may choose to apply
tone-mapping in your app
so that your content won't
exceed the current headroom,
which would cause it to clip.
Let's take a look
at a simple example.
As in the previous example,
we'll start by getting
a UIScreen from windowScene.
From there, we'll get the
potential EDR headroom property.
Then we can compare
the potential EDR headroom value
to a threshold and decide
whether to implement
an SDR rendering path
or image processing path.
Here is an example of how
to use the current EDR headroom
property of UIScreen.
In a draw call, we can again
get a UIScreen from windowScene
and then grab the UIScreen
property currentEDRHeadroom.
You could use this value
to determine
an appropriate tone map
that will avoid clipping
and apply it in your app.
Now that I've covered
UIScreen APIs
and reviewed some code snippets,
we've reached the end
of this video.
To recap, we learned
how and when
to enable Reference Mode
on iPad.
We discussed
reference color rendering
and the specific capabilities
of Reference Mode,
including which media formats
it supports.
And finally,
we learned about
UIScreen Reference Mode
notifications
and new properties
for querying EDR headroom.
If you want to learn more about
EDR and color technology
on Apple platforms,
here's a list of videos
on related topics
from the last few WWDCs.
The "Explore EDR on iOS"
video from this year
is especially relevant if
you're working with EDR on iPad,
either with or without
Reference Mode.
And that brings us
to the end of our talk.
I hope that you'll take
advantage of Reference Mode
and its APIs in your app.
Thanks for watching.